README.md, before:

<div align="center">
<h1>YT Download</h1>

A GUI based YouTube downloader made with [yt-dlp](https://www.github.com/yt-dlp/yt-dlp)

![winget](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/60891047/227323272-91f61384-b3af-4710-bac1-5d8f976333bd.png)
</div>

## Table of Contents  
* [Change Log](#change-log)
* [Installation](#installation)  
    * [Windows](#windows)  
    * [Linux](#linux)
    * [Suggested Changes for Linux Users](#suggested-changes-for-linux-users)
* [User Manual](#user-manual)  
    * [Launching on Linux](#launching-on-linux)
    * [Downloading Playlists](#downloading-playlists)
* [Changing Settings](#changing-settings)
    * [Directory Settings](#directory-settings)
    * [Popup Settings](#popup-settings)
    * [Miscellaneous Settings](#miscellaneous-settings)
    * [Making Changes](#making-changes)
* [Credits](#credits)

## Change Log
<!-- Working on 1.3.0, I have been procrastinating with this documentation lol - Joey. -->
STILL IN DEV  

## Installation    
### Windows
You can install YT Download with `winget` by typing `winget install yt-download` in a powershell window. Alternatively, you can download the latest installer from the [Release tab.](https://github.com/Joey451-OG/YT-Download/releases)  

### Linux  
Since YT Download does not yet have a linux binary, you'll need to clone this github repo, install the dependencies, and start up YT Download by running the python file with the same name. Here is a step-by-step guide on how to do just that.  

First, install git:
```
$ sudo apt install git
```  
Next, install pip.  
```
$ sudo apt install python3-pip
```
Make sure to navigate to the folder where you want YT Download to install to.  
Then, clone this repo:
```
$ git clone https://www.github.com/Joey451-OG/YT-Download
```
Now it's time to install the dependencies.  
First, install PySimpleGUI:
```
$ pip install PySimpleGUI
```
Next, install Tkinter:
```
$ sudo apt install python3-tk
```
Now, install yt-dlp:
```
$ pip install yt-dlp
```
yt-dlp may not install to the PATH. To fix this, open `~/.bashrc` as `sudo`
```
$ sudo nano ~/.bashrc
```

> If you don't have nano installed, you can install it with:  
>```
>$ sudo apt install nano
>```

Then add this line to the bottom of the file.
```bash
export PATH="/home/YOUR_USERNAME_HERE/.local/bin:$PATH"
```

To save the file press `Ctrl+X` then press `y` and `enter`  

Then, source the `~/.bashrc` file.
```
$ source ~/.bashrc
```
Finally, install FFmpeg:
```
$ sudo apt install ffmpeg
```

YT Download is now ready to use. To launch YT Download, use this command in the directory where this repo was cloned:
```
$ python3 'YT Download.py'
``` 

The rest of the documentation still applies to linux. In rare instances where there are differences, there will be ample explanation.  

### Suggested Changes for Linux Users

Even though YT Download is fully functional (given you have followed the tutorial above), users might wish to make some quality of life changes.

First would be to rename `YT Download.py` to `YT-Download.py` in order to not have to type quotation marks when launching the program. This can be done using a GUI, but to do it in the terminal first navigate to where YT Download is installed and then run this command.
```
$ mv 'YT Download.py' YT-Download.py
```

Finally, it is very inconvenient to have to navigate to where YT Download was installed in order to launch it. To fix this, we need to make some modifications.

First, open `main.py` with nano.
```
$ nano main.py
```
Navigate to the `config` class, it's at the top of the script right underneath the license. Change `with open('config.yml', 'r') [...]` to `with open('/home/YOUR_USERNAME_HERE/bin/config.yml', 'r') [...]`.

```python
# Handles the config file
class config:
    def __init__(self) -> None:
        with open('/home/YOUR_USERNAME_HERE/bin/config.yml', 'r') as file:
            [...]
```

Save the file by pressing `Ctrl + X` then `y` then `enter`.  

Next, open `YT-Download.py` with nano
```
$ nano YT-Download.py
```
Add this line to the very top of the file.
```
#!/usr/bin/env python3
```
Save the file.  

Make the script executable by running this command.
```
$ chmod +x YT-Download.py
```
Now, make two directories in the home folder. ALso, make a `python` directory in the lib folder.
```
$ cd ~
$ mkdir bin lib
$ mkdir lib/python
```
Next, open the `~/.bashrc` file as sudo.
```
$ sudo nano ~/.bashrc
```

Navigate to the bottom of the file and add this line:
```bash
PYTHONPATH=$HOME/lib/python
EDITOR=nano

export PYTHONPATH EDITOR
```
You will need to sign-out/sign-in for these changes to take into effect.  

Now navigate back into the directory where YT-Download is installed and move the following files to the new `/bin` directory.
```
$ mv YT-Download.py ~/bin/
$ mv main.py ~/bin/
$ mv config.yml ~/bin/
$ mv logo.png ~/bin/
```

You are now done. To run YT-Download simply type this command.
```
$ YT-Download.py
```

> **Note:** You can delete the cloned repo directory since it is no longer needed.


## User Manual  
After installing the program with the .msi or `winget`, open YT Download.

<img width="600" alt="opening" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/60891047/225435630-903ae087-debf-4dbf-919b-db6555c6c089.png">  

> ### Launching on Linux
> STILL IN DEV

The program will open a terminal window and the GUI. Do not close the terminal, it is required for the program to run.

<img width="1280" alt="first open" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/60891047/225436355-a131b435-9930-45b1-b675-aac36f67b2c3.png">

Now, simply copy the url of the YouTube video you want to download and paste it in the `YouTube URL` feild.

<img width="1280" alt="url" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/60891047/225436615-f6fbccc0-b49d-41e8-b100-f7a1cfdc2df1.png">

Make sure to check the `Download as an audio file (mp3)?` checkbox if you want to download as an audio file. For example, this video is an official audio video, so I will be checking this box.

>          
> **NOTE: This program automatically downloads your videos/audio in the highest quality possible.**
> 

<img width="1280" alt="url" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/60891047/225436855-26570c71-893c-4aed-b572-0587ccc295cf.png">

Now choose a file path for your file to be saved. You can leave this option blank and the program will automatically download to `Documents\YT Download` folder. The `Documents` folder is a defualt folder in the Windows OS.

<img width="1280" alt="custom location" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/60891047/225437649-31a4a053-32d3-4dd2-8014-b0d733cdb909.png">

Next, just click `Download`. 

<img width="1280" alt="downloading" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/60891047/225438384-54e39af8-de50-4af3-af46-d25bd1e3c7e6.png">

> 
> ### Downloading Playlists
> To download a playlist follow all of the above and bellow steps. Just make sure to click `Yes` on the popup. This popup is to warn the user that they are about to download a playlist. When downloading a playlist, YT Download will download all videos in the playlist to your chosen file path and as your chosen file type.
> 
> <img width="304" alt="Playlist Warning" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/60891047/225441213-089e396e-b585-4721-8119-e13da2fe3902.png">
> 
  
Once your file is done downloading, a popup will appear showing the title of the youtube video you downloaded and where on your computer you saved it. (When downloading a playlist, this popup will only appear once the whole playlist is done downloading so please be patient.)

<img width="1280" alt="downloaded" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/60891047/225439007-7dadec6c-623e-4445-8ac7-6bd664f8f972.png">

<img width="872" alt="file" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/60891047/225439475-56294cf0-db5c-497d-bdc6-55af6150614b.png">  

## Changing Settings  
1.3.0 Introduced the ability to change YT Download's settings by modifying the `config.yml` file. Here is a breakdown on what each option does.  

This is the default state of `config.yml`
```yaml
# Directory Settings
use_default_directory: yes
custom_default_directory: paste\custom\default\directory\path\here

# Popup Settings
playlist_confirmation: yes
file_downloaded: yes

# Miscellaneous Settings
default_as_audio: no
color_theme: DarkAmber # For a full list of available themes, see 'themes.png' in YT Download's install location
```

The config file is broken up into three sub-sections: `Directory Settings`, `Popup Settings`, and `Miscellaneous Settings`. [Directory Settings](#directory-settings) controls how YT Download handles directories, [Popup Settings](#popup-settings) handles how YT Download uses popups, and [Miscellaneous Settings](#miscellaneous-settings) controls... well.. miscellaneous settings such as YT Download's color theme.  

### Directory Settings
As stated previously, `Directory Settings` controls how YT Download handles directories.  

`use_default_directory` | Input: *yes*, *no*  
If *yes* YT Download will use the default directory. For windows users the default directory is: `C:\users\%USERPROFILE%\Documents\YT Download`. For linux users the default directory is: `~/Documents/YT-Download`. If *no*, then YT Download will use whatever directory is specified in `custom_default_directory` as the default directory.   
  
`custom_default_directory` | Input: *PATH str*  
Whatever directory path that is inputted here will be used as the default directory if 
`use_default_directory` is *no*.  

> Note: One common mistake when using this feature is not typing the directory in properly. The author strongly recommends pasting the directory path into this field. However, if one is unable to do such, remember to use backslashes ( `\` ) for windows and forward slashes ( `/` ) for linux. If the directory is inputted incorrectly, YT Download will make a new directory in the program's root directory.  
  
### Popup Settings
`Popup Settings` handles which popups YT Download shows.
> Note: `Popup Settings` cannot disable error popups

`playlist_confirmation` | Input: *yes*, *no*  
If *yes*, the [playlist confirmation popup](#downloading-playlists) will be shown. If *no*, the popup will not be shown. This will result in the playlist being downloaded without any extra user input.  

`file_downloaded` | Input: *yes*, *no*  
If *yes* the [file downloaded](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/60891047/225439007-7dadec6c-623e-4445-8ac7-6bd664f8f972.png) popup will be shown. If *no*, the popup will not be shown.  

### Miscellaneous Settings
`Miscellaneous Settings` handles a mix of different settings.  

`default_as_audio` | Input: *yes*, *no*  
If *yes*, the `Download as audio file (mp3)?` box will already be selected when opening YT Download. If *no* the checkbox will not be selected by default.  

`color_theme` | Input: *str*  
Controls which PySimpleGUI color theme will be used. To change the color theme, simple pick a theme and copy its' name into the field. Make sure to mind the casing (e.g., *DarkAmber* is a valid theme but *darkamber* is not).  

![themes](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/60891047/231323710-094b9efd-9f88-490d-b172-4e42cc56dd1b.png)

For an interactive version of this image follow the steps bellow.  

- Make sure Python is installed then run: `pip install PySimpleGUI` in a terminal window.  
- Start up Python by typing the command `python` (or `python3` for linux users).
- Paste the bellow code:  
```python
import PySimpleGUI

PySimpleGUI.theme_previewer()
```
### Making Changes
After you are finished editing the config file, simply save the file and researt YT Download for the changes to come into effect.

## Credits
Icon: Image by https://pixabay.com/images/id-1834016/

Dependencies:

YT-DLP: https://github.com/yt-dlp/yt-dlp

PySimpleGUI: https://github.com/PySimpleGUI/PySimpleGUI

FFmpeg: https://ffmpeg.org/

Thank you for using YT Download!

Commit message:

Added 1.3.0 change log.
Preparing build now...

README.md, after:

<div align="center">
<h1>YT Download</h1>

A GUI based YouTube downloader made with [yt-dlp](https://www.github.com/yt-dlp/yt-dlp)

![winget](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/60891047/227323272-91f61384-b3af-4710-bac1-5d8f976333bd.png)
</div>

## Table of Contents  
* [Change Log](#change-log)
* [Installation](#installation)  
    * [Windows](#windows)  
    * [Linux](#linux)
    * [Suggested Changes for Linux Users](#suggested-changes-for-linux-users)
* [User Manual](#user-manual)  
    * [Launching on Linux](#launching-on-linux)
    * [Downloading Playlists](#downloading-playlists)
* [Changing Settings](#changing-settings)
    * [Directory Settings](#directory-settings)
    * [Popup Settings](#popup-settings)
    * [Miscellaneous Settings](#miscellaneous-settings)
    * [Making Changes](#making-changes)
* [Credits](#credits)

## Change Log
➕ Added the ability to change settings through the [config](#changing-settings) file.  
➕ Added Linux support and documentation.  
➕ Revamped the documentation  
➕ Added terminal messages that display program progress in the terminal.  
🐛 Simplified the code base in order to make the source more readable.  

## Installation    
### Windows
You can install YT Download with `winget` by typing `winget install yt-download` in a powershell window. Alternatively, you can download the latest installer from the [Release tab.](https://github.com/Joey451-OG/YT-Download/releases)  

### Linux  
Since YT Download does not yet have a linux binary, you'll need to clone this github repo, install the dependencies, and start up YT Download by running the python file with the same name. Here is a step-by-step guide on how to do just that.  

First, install git:
```
$ sudo apt install git
```  
Next, install pip.  
```
$ sudo apt install python3-pip
```
Make sure to navigate to the folder where you want YT Download to install to.  
Then, clone this repo:
```
$ git clone https://www.github.com/Joey451-OG/YT-Download
```
Now it's time to install the dependencies.  
First, install PySimpleGUI:
```
$ pip install PySimpleGUI
```
Next, install Tkinter:
```
$ sudo apt install python3-tk
```
Now, install yt-dlp:
```
$ pip install yt-dlp
```
yt-dlp may not install to the PATH. To fix this, open `~/.bashrc` as `sudo`
```
$ sudo nano ~/.bashrc
```

> If you don't have nano installed, you can install it with:  
>```
>$ sudo apt install nano
>```

Then add this line to the bottom of the file.
```bash
export PATH="/home/YOUR_USERNAME_HERE/.local/bin:$PATH"
```

To save the file press `Ctrl+X` then press `y` and `enter`  

Then, source the `~/.bashrc` file.
```
$ source ~/.bashrc
```
Finally, install FFmpeg:
```
$ sudo apt install ffmpeg
```

YT Download is now ready to use. To launch YT Download, use this command in the directory where this repo was cloned:
```
$ python3 'YT Download.py'
``` 

The rest of the documentation still applies to linux. In rare instances where there are differences, there will be ample explanation.  

### Suggested Changes for Linux Users

Even though YT Download is fully functional (given you have followed the tutorial above), users might wish to make some quality of life changes.

First would be to rename `YT Download.py` to `YT-Download.py` in order to not have to type quotation marks when launching the program. This can be done using a GUI, but to do it in the terminal first navigate to where YT Download is installed and then run this command.
```
$ mv 'YT Download.py' YT-Download.py
```

Finally, it is very inconvenient to have to navigate to where YT Download was installed in order to launch it. To fix this, we need to make some modifications.

First, open `main.py` with nano.
```
$ nano main.py
```
Navigate to the `config` class, it's at the top of the script right underneath the license. Change `with open('config.yml', 'r') [...]` to `with open('/home/YOUR_USERNAME_HERE/bin/config.yml', 'r') [...]`.

```python
# Handles the config file
class config:
    def __init__(self) -> None:
        with open('/home/YOUR_USERNAME_HERE/bin/config.yml', 'r') as file:
            [...]
```

Save the file by pressing `Ctrl + X` then `y` then `enter`.  

Next, open `YT-Download.py` with nano
```
$ nano YT-Download.py
```
Add this line to the very top of the file.
```
#!/usr/bin/env python3
```
Save the file.  

Make the script executable by running this command.
```
$ chmod +x YT-Download.py
```
Now, make two directories in the home folder. ALso, make a `python` directory in the lib folder.
```
$ cd ~
$ mkdir bin lib
$ mkdir lib/python
```
Next, open the `~/.bashrc` file as sudo.
```
$ sudo nano ~/.bashrc
```

Navigate to the bottom of the file and add this line:
```bash
PYTHONPATH=$HOME/lib/python
EDITOR=nano

export PYTHONPATH EDITOR
```
You will need to sign-out/sign-in for these changes to take into effect.  

Now navigate back into the directory where YT-Download is installed and move the following files to the new `/bin` directory.
```
$ mv YT-Download.py ~/bin/
$ mv main.py ~/bin/
$ mv config.yml ~/bin/
$ mv logo.png ~/bin/
```

You are now done. To run YT-Download simply type this command.
```
$ YT-Download.py
```

> **Note:** You can delete the cloned repo directory since it is no longer needed.


## User Manual  
After installing the program with the .msi or `winget`, open YT Download.

<img width="600" alt="opening" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/60891047/225435630-903ae087-debf-4dbf-919b-db6555c6c089.png">  

> ### Launching on Linux
> STILL IN DEV

The program will open a terminal window and the GUI. Do not close the terminal, it is required for the program to run.

<img width="1280" alt="first open" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/60891047/225436355-a131b435-9930-45b1-b675-aac36f67b2c3.png">

Now, simply copy the url of the YouTube video you want to download and paste it in the `YouTube URL` feild.

<img width="1280" alt="url" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/60891047/225436615-f6fbccc0-b49d-41e8-b100-f7a1cfdc2df1.png">

Make sure to check the `Download as an audio file (mp3)?` checkbox if you want to download as an audio file. For example, this video is an official audio video, so I will be checking this box.

>          
> **NOTE: This program automatically downloads your videos/audio in the highest quality possible.**
> 

<img width="1280" alt="url" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/60891047/225436855-26570c71-893c-4aed-b572-0587ccc295cf.png">

Now choose a file path for your file to be saved. You can leave this option blank and the program will automatically download to `Documents\YT Download` folder. The `Documents` folder is a defualt folder in the Windows OS.

<img width="1280" alt="custom location" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/60891047/225437649-31a4a053-32d3-4dd2-8014-b0d733cdb909.png">

Next, just click `Download`. 

<img width="1280" alt="downloading" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/60891047/225438384-54e39af8-de50-4af3-af46-d25bd1e3c7e6.png">

> 
> ### Downloading Playlists
> To download a playlist follow all of the above and bellow steps. Just make sure to click `Yes` on the popup. This popup is to warn the user that they are about to download a playlist. When downloading a playlist, YT Download will download all videos in the playlist to your chosen file path and as your chosen file type.
> 
> <img width="304" alt="Playlist Warning" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/60891047/225441213-089e396e-b585-4721-8119-e13da2fe3902.png">
> 
  
Once your file is done downloading, a popup will appear showing the title of the youtube video you downloaded and where on your computer you saved it. (When downloading a playlist, this popup will only appear once the whole playlist is done downloading so please be patient.)

<img width="1280" alt="downloaded" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/60891047/225439007-7dadec6c-623e-4445-8ac7-6bd664f8f972.png">

<img width="872" alt="file" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/60891047/225439475-56294cf0-db5c-497d-bdc6-55af6150614b.png">  

## Changing Settings  
1.3.0 Introduced the ability to change YT Download's settings by modifying the `config.yml` file. Here is a breakdown on what each option does.  

This is the default state of `config.yml`
```yaml
# Directory Settings
use_default_directory: yes
custom_default_directory: paste\custom\default\directory\path\here

# Popup Settings
playlist_confirmation: yes
file_downloaded: yes

# Miscellaneous Settings
default_as_audio: no
color_theme: DarkAmber # For a full list of available themes, see 'themes.png' in YT Download's install location
```

The config file is broken up into three sub-sections: `Directory Settings`, `Popup Settings`, and `Miscellaneous Settings`. [Directory Settings](#directory-settings) controls how YT Download handles directories, [Popup Settings](#popup-settings) handles how YT Download uses popups, and [Miscellaneous Settings](#miscellaneous-settings) controls... well.. miscellaneous settings such as YT Download's color theme.  

### Directory Settings
As stated previously, `Directory Settings` controls how YT Download handles directories.  

`use_default_directory` | Input: *yes*, *no*  
If *yes* YT Download will use the default directory. For windows users the default directory is: `C:\users\%USERPROFILE%\Documents\YT Download`. For linux users the default directory is: `~/Documents/YT-Download`. If *no*, then YT Download will use whatever directory is specified in `custom_default_directory` as the default directory.   
  
`custom_default_directory` | Input: *PATH str*  
Whatever directory path that is inputted here will be used as the default directory if 
`use_default_directory` is *no*.  

> Note: One common mistake when using this feature is not typing the directory in properly. The author strongly recommends pasting the directory path into this field. However, if one is unable to do such, remember to use backslashes ( `\` ) for windows and forward slashes ( `/` ) for linux. If the directory is inputted incorrectly, YT Download will make a new directory in the program's root directory.  
  
### Popup Settings
`Popup Settings` handles which popups YT Download shows.
> Note: `Popup Settings` cannot disable error popups

`playlist_confirmation` | Input: *yes*, *no*  
If *yes*, the [playlist confirmation popup](#downloading-playlists) will be shown. If *no*, the popup will not be shown. This will result in the playlist being downloaded without any extra user input.  

`file_downloaded` | Input: *yes*, *no*  
If *yes* the [file downloaded](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/60891047/225439007-7dadec6c-623e-4445-8ac7-6bd664f8f972.png) popup will be shown. If *no*, the popup will not be shown.  

### Miscellaneous Settings
`Miscellaneous Settings` handles a mix of different settings.  

`default_as_audio` | Input: *yes*, *no*  
If *yes*, the `Download as audio file (mp3)?` box will already be selected when opening YT Download. If *no* the checkbox will not be selected by default.  

`color_theme` | Input: *str*  
Controls which PySimpleGUI color theme will be used. To change the color theme, simple pick a theme and copy its' name into the field. Make sure to mind the casing (e.g., *DarkAmber* is a valid theme but *darkamber* is not).  

![themes](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/60891047/231323710-094b9efd-9f88-490d-b172-4e42cc56dd1b.png)

For an interactive version of this image follow the steps bellow.  

- Make sure Python is installed then run: `pip install PySimpleGUI` in a terminal window.  
- Start up Python by typing the command `python` (or `python3` for linux users).
- Paste the bellow code:  
```python
import PySimpleGUI

PySimpleGUI.theme_previewer()
```
### Making Changes
After you are finished editing the config file, simply save the file and researt YT Download for the changes to come into effect.

## Credits
Icon: Image by https://pixabay.com/images/id-1834016/

Dependencies:

YT-DLP: https://github.com/yt-dlp/yt-dlp

PySimpleGUI: https://github.com/PySimpleGUI/PySimpleGUI

FFmpeg: https://ffmpeg.org/

Thank you for using YT Download!
